---
title: "Data-Driven Approaches for the Feature-based Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows"
collection: talks
type: "Conference"
excerpt: ''
permalink: /talks/2023-07-25-informs
venue: "2023 INFORMS Transportation and Logistics Society (TSL) Second Triennial Conference"
date: 2023-07-25
location: "Chicago, IL, USA"
---

We study the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) and stochastic travel times, in which related exogenous features are revealed to the decision-maker before routing decisions are made. Despite the extensive literature on stochastic VRPs, the presence of exogenous features has so far been ignored in this context. We address this research gap by introducing the feature-based VRPTW, which minimizes the total transportation cost and expected late arrival penalties conditioned on the observed features. Since the joint distribution of travel times and features is unknown, we present data-driven surrogate models that use historical data to provide an approximate solution to the problem. In particular, data-driven deterministic models formulate the surrogate problem in which travel times are fixed to some estimated values given, e.g., by a predictive model (predict-then-optimize paradigm). In contrast, data-driven stochastic models capture travel time variability by considering a set of travel time scenarios and formulating the corresponding sample average approximation (SAA) problem. In this setting, the decision-maker can take the observed features into account either by associating a feature-dependent weight function to each sample or by directly constructing feature-based travel time scenarios.
We develop a specialized branch-price-and-cut method for solving the data-driven surrogate models and compare their out-of-sample cost performance in computational experiments.
We achieve promising results by combining SAA with the generation of feature-based scenarios for the travel times.